Add Metric Expression Examples (#71)
Dynatrace/dynatrace-api: metric-example/metric-expressions-by-example.md

# Metric Expressions by Example
This is an example-oriented document that will teach you advanced 
techniques with metric selectors that will enable you to:
* convert °F to Kelvin,
* calculate an error rate metric from a service call count metric and an error count metric,

> * show the available memory of those hosts that run the most memory-intensive process group instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* show the available memory of the hosts that run the most memory-intensive process group instances.
```

## Prerequisites
This document assumes basic familiarity with metric selectors. If you don't yet feel comfortable with simple metric selectors, consider reading
through [Query by Example](query-by-example.md) first.

You can try the examples listed here through the Web UI via _Data Explorer_,
or you can send selectors to the `/v2/metrics/query` API for evaluation.

## Scenario 1: Convert Fahrenheit to Kelvin

> > **Task**

Reviewer: After this occurrence, "**Task**" is always on the same line as the following text.

Reviewer: ...except Scenario 4

Author: Let's make it consistent by having it always on the same line.

> breaking change.

`builtin:service.errors.fourxx.count` gives us just the amount of service calls with a 4xx exit
status, while `builtin:service.errors.total.count` additionally includes 5xx errors. If our
REST service has the entity ID `SERVICE-1234567890`, then we can get the percentage of errors
in the 4xx range with:
```
(
  (100)
  *
  (builtin:service.errors.fourxx.count)
  /
  (builtin:service.errors.total.count)
):filter(eq("dt.entity.service","SERVICE-1234567890"))
```

How does such a calculation with two separate metrics work? Dynatrace will first find all the series
with equal dimensions. For each match, we combine the associated data at the same time slot by applying
the numbers to the arithmetic operator in use. With the result, we assemble a new output series for each
match.

In the case of our example, we use this functionality to divide error counts that were measured in the
same time slot.

## Scenario 3: Revenue in Percent over the Query Timeframe
> **Task** Which percentage of our revenue was made in any given month of the last year?

We store revenue data in a metric called `revenue` that is split by a single dimension

> `region`. Instead of revenue in absolute terms, we want to see for each timeslot how many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`region`. Instead of revenue in absolute terms, we want to see for each timeslot what
```

> percent of the revenue over the whole query timeframe fall into that timeslot. In other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
percentage of the revenue over the whole query timeframe fall into that timeslot. In other
```

words, we want to divide by the combined revenue over the whole query timeframe and multiply
by 100.

> For the multiplication by `100`, we can just a numeric literal, but for the combined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the multiplication by `100`, we can just use a numeric literal, but for the combined
```

revenue we would need a calculated value instead of a fixed one.

To achieve that with metric expressions, we need to reduce the revenue result to a
single value. This is done by first merging all dimensions into one using `splitBy()`,
yielding a single dimension-less series. Next, we want to apply `fold` to sum up all of
the individual data points of this one series, so that we end up with a single number
for the full revenue.

> Putting it all together, we set our resolution to months, set `from` to `now-1y to now`

Reviewer: Is that right? `from` to `now-1y to now`
Doesn't `from` just become `now-1y`?

Author: Both are correct, we can:
* leave out `to` (and rely on the default value `now`) and set `from` to `now-1y` as you suggested,
* set `from` to `now-1y to now`,
* set `from` to `now-1y` and `to` to `now`.

Do you want to leave it as-is or should we go with the shorter version?

Reviewer: As long as it's not a mistake we're good 👍

and finally our metric selector:
```
(100) * (revenue) / (revenue:splitBy():fold)
```

What would happen if we omitted the `fold`? In that case the percentage in any given timeslot

> will be relative to the full revenue over all countries just in that timeslot, instead of

Reviewer: This is the first and only mention of "countries"/"country". Are we actually talking about countries?

Author: Right, I changed it at some point to "region" - Thanks!

> being relative to the revenue of the whole time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being relative to the revenue of the whole timeframe:
```

```
(100) * (revenue) / (revenue:splitBy())
```

> When omitting the `splitBy()`, but keeping the `fold`, then the percentages will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we omit the `splitBy()`, but keep the `fold`, then the percentages will
```

the same way as a numeric literal. When doing arithmetic, think about which of your operands
should be series and which should be points (`:fold`). Also think about whether you want
to pair equal tuples for the calculation, or if you instead want all tuples of one side
to be paired with a single, empty tuple on the other side (`:splitBy()`). Each combination
has its own use cases.

## Scenario 4: Response Time Categories
> **Task**
> Given a maximum acceptable response time of t = 1.5s in the 99th percentile, we want to
> classify response times of our services as "satisfactory" (&le; t), "tolerable" (&le; 4t)
> or "frustrating" (&gt; 4t). We want to see how the service count in each category changes
> over time.

_Note: This scenario uses the partition operator, which is available in Dynatrace versions 227 and later._

First, we obtain a response time in the 99th percentile for each timeslot and every service,
and we scale from microseconds to full seconds:
```
(builtin:service.response.time:percentile(99)) / (1000) / (1000)
```

Next up, we want to categorize each data point into one of the three categories. This is done

> by splitting up each series into up three new ones, and then assigning each data point to at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by splitting up each series into three new ones, and then assigning each data point to at
```

most one of the three new series, depending on their value. When a data point has been assigned

> to one category, then the same timeslot will be `null` for the other categories. Let's use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to one category, the same timeslot will be `null` for the other categories. Let's use the
```

`partition` operator to achieve just that:
```
: partition(
    apdexCategory,
    value("satisfactory", range(0, 1.5)),
    value("tolerable",    range(1.5, 6)),
    value("frustrating",  otherwise) 
  )
```

> Now, the reponse time series for each series belong to a new series with "dt.entity.service"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the response time series for each series belongs to a new series with "dt.entity.service"
```

> and "apdexCategory" as their dimension. Now we want to merge all data with the same category. By specifying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and "apdexCategory" as their dimensions. Now we want to merge all data with the same category. By specifying
```

`:count` after the merge operation, instead of the values, we query just the data point count that
made it into the merge of each timeslot:
```
: splitBy("apdexCategory")
: count
```

> That's almost what we want, but if not a single data point was available for a timeslot of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's almost what we want, but if no data point was available for a timeslot of a
```

category, the value will be a data gap, which is represented with `null`. `0` would be more
correct for our use case, so let's replace nulls with zero:
```
: default(0)
```

Putting it all together we get:
```
((builtin:service.response.time:percentile(99)) / (1000) / (1000))
: partition(
    apdexCategory,
    value("satisfactory", range(0, 1.5)),
    value("tolerable",    range(1.5, 6)),
    value("frustrating",  otherwise) 
  )
: splitBy("apdexCategory")
: count
: default(0)
```

With the tools from this scenario at our disposal we can:
* split up data points of series into categories,
* count merged data points,
* assign a default value for gaps in the data.

## Scenario 5: Available Memory of Hosts with Top 10 PGIs
> **Task** We recently increased the maximum heap space for all our Java processes to achieve

> > better utilization of available RAM. We want to check if the remaining memory of the hosts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> better utilization of available RAM. We want to verifying that there's enough free memory on the hosts where the Top 10 most memory consuming processes run.
```

Author: Much better.

I made the change, but used "to verify" instead of "to verifying".
